Feat(Mesh): migrate Observability page from Kuma source to Mesh docs (#5166)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/mesh/observability.md

    url: '/mesh/version-compatibility/'
  - text: Policy Hub
    url: /mesh/policies/
  - text: Mesh CLI
    url: /mesh/cli/
  - text: Data plane health
    url: /mesh/dataplane-health/
---

This page describes how to configure different observability tools to work with {{site.mesh_product_name}}.

`kumactl` ships with a built-in observability stack that includes:

- [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) for metrics
- [Jaeger](https://jaegertracing.io) for ingesting and storing traces
- [Loki](https://grafana.com/oss/loki/) for ingesting and storing logs
- [Grafana](https://grafana.com/oss/grafana/) for querying and displaying metrics, traces, and logs

To enable observability, you need the following policies:

- [`MeshMetric`](/mesh/policies/meshmetric/) for telemetry
- [`MeshTrace`](/mesh/policies/meshtrace/) for tracing
- [`MeshAccessLog`](/mesh/policies/meshaccesslog/) for logging

On Kubernetes, the stack can be installed with:

```sh
kumactl install observability | kubectl apply -f -
```

This creates a namespace named `mesh-observability` with Prometheus, Jaeger, Loki, and Grafana installed and set up to work with {{site.mesh_product_name}}.

{:.warning}

> > This setup is meant for testing purposes. It is not fit for production use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This setup is meant for testing purposes. Do not use it for production.
```

> For production setups, we recommend referring to each project's website or using a hosted solution such as Grafana Cloud or Datadog.

## Control plane observability

The control plane supports metrics and traces for observability.

### Metrics

Control plane metrics are exposed on port `:5680` and available under the standard path `/metrics`.

### Traces

> You cna configure {{site.mesh_product_name}} to export OpenTelemetry traces. It exports traces for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure {{site.mesh_product_name}} to export OpenTelemetry traces. It exports traces for:
```

* API server
* KDS on global (only basic information about the connections to zones are traced, nothing resource-specific)
* Inter-CP server

To enable tracing, set the `KUMA_TRACING_OPENTELEMETRY_ENABLED` or `tracing.openTelemetry.enabled` control plane
config variable to `"true"` and configure OpenTelemetry using the
[standard `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_*` environment variables](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/sdk-configuration/otlp-exporter).

## Configure Prometheus

The Kuma community has contributed built-in service discovery for Prometheus. It is documented in the [Prometheus docs](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#kuma_sd_config).
This service discovery connects to the control plane and retrieves all data planes with enabled metrics, which Prometheus scrapes and retrieves according to your [`MeshMetric` policies](/mesh/policies/meshmetric).

> There are three ways to run prometheus:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three ways to run Prometheus:
```

1. Inside the mesh (default with `kumactl install observability`).

> 2. Outside the mesh. In this case you need to specify `tls.mode: disabled` in the `MeshMetric` configuration. This is less secure but ensures Prometheus is as available as possible. It's also easier to add to an existing setup with services in and outside the mesh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Outside the mesh. In this case, you must specify `tls.mode: disabled` in the `MeshMetric` configuration. This is less secure but ensures Prometheus is as available as possible. It's also easier to add to an existing setup with services in and outside the mesh.
```

> 3. Outside the mesh with TLS enabled. In this case you need to provide certificates for each data plane and specify the configuration in the `MeshMetric` policy. This is more secure than the second option but requires more configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Outside the mesh with TLS enabled. In this case, you need to provide certificates for each data plane and specify the configuration in the `MeshMetric` policy. This is more secure than the second option but requires more configuration.
```

In production, we recommend the second option because it provides better visibility when things go wrong, and it's usually acceptable for metrics to be less secure.

### Use an existing prometheus setup

> In Prometheus version 2.29 and later, you can add {{site.mesh_product_name}} metrics to your `prometheus.yml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Prometheus version 2.29 or later, you can add {{site.mesh_product_name}} metrics to your `prometheus.yml`:
```

        regex: "(.*)"
        target_label: mesh
      - source_labels:
          - __meta_kuma_dataplane
        regex: "(.*)"
        target_label: dataplane
      - action: labelmap
        regex: __meta_kuma_label_(.+)
    kuma_sd_configs:
      - server: "http://{{site.mesh_cp_name}}.{{site.mesh_namespace}}.svc:5676"
```

For more information, see [the Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#kuma_sd_config).

If you have [`MeshMetric`](/mesh/policies/meshmetric) enabled for your mesh, check the **Targets** page in the Prometheus dashboard.
You should see a list of data plane proxies from your mesh.

## Configure Grafana

You can use Grafana to visualize traces from Jaeger and logs from Loki, and the Kuma community ships dashboards and a data source for deeper integration.

### Visualize traces

To visualize your traces with Grafana, you can configure a new data source with the URL `http://jaeger-query.mesh-observability/` (or ay other URL Jaeger can be queried at).
Grafana can then retrieve traces from Jaeger.

You can then add a [`MeshTrace` policy](/mesh/policies/meshtrace) to your mesh to start emitting traces.

> At this point you can visualize your traces in Grafana by choosing the jaeger data source in the [**Explore** section](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/explore/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point you can visualize your traces in Grafana by choosing the Jaeger data source in the [**Explore** section](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/explore/).
```

* **Kuma Service**: Investigate aggregated statistics for each service.
* **Kuma Service to Service**: Investigate aggregated statistics from data planes of specified source services to data planes of specified destination services.

## Configure Datadog

The recommended way to use Datadog is with its [agent](https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent).

### Metrics

{{site.mesh_product_name}} exposes metrics with the [`MeshMetric` policy](/mesh/policies/meshmetric) in Prometheus format.

You can add annotations to your Pods to enable the Datadog agent to scrape metrics.

For Kubernetes, refer to the dedicated [documentation](https://docs.datadoghq.com/containers/kubernetes/prometheus/?tab=helm#metric-collection-with-prometheus-annotations-prometheus-check).

On Universal, set up your agent with an [openmetrics.d/conf.yaml](https://docs.datadoghq.com/integrations/guide/prometheus-host-collection/#pagetitle).

### Tracing

To configure tracing using Datadog on Universal, see the [Datadog agent docs](https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent).

On Kubernetes, configure the [Datadog agent for APM](https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/kubernetes/apm/).

> If Datadog is not running on each node, you can expose the APM agent port to {{site.mesh_product_name}} via a Kubernetes service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Datadog isn't running on each node, you can expose the APM agent port to {{site.mesh_product_name}} via a Kubernetes service.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: trace-svc
spec:
  selector:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: datadog-agent-deployment
  ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 8126
      targetPort: 8126
```

> Check that the label of the installed Datadog pod has not changed (`app.kubernetes.io/name: datadog-agent-deployment`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check that the label of the installed Datadog pod hasn't changed (`app.kubernetes.io/name: datadog-agent-deployment`).
```

If it changed, adjust accordingly.

> Once the agent is configured to ingest traces, you need to configure a [MeshTrace policy](/mesh/policies/meshtrace).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the agent is configured to ingest traces, you must configure a [MeshTrace policy](/mesh/policies/meshtrace).
```
